.TH qmail-init 8
.SH NAME
qmail-init \- start/stop scripts for qmail
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B init.d/qmail
[
.I start
|
.I stop
|
.I restart
|
.I status
]

.B init.d/qmtpd
[
.I start
|
.I stop
|
.I restart
|
.I status
]

.B init.d/pop3d
[
.I start
|
.I stop
|
.I restart
|
.I status
]

.B init.d/qmqpd
[
.I start
|
.I stop
|
.I restart
|
.I status
]

.B init.d/qmtpd
[
.I start
|
.I stop
|
.I restart
|
.I status
]

.B init.d/smtpd
[
.I start
|
.I stop
|
.I restart
|
.I status
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
These init scripts are responsible for starting and stopping the three
main qmail services.
.B init.d/qmail
invokes
.BR qmail-start
(the main qmail delivery agent),
.BR init.d/pop3d
invokes
.BR pop3front-auth
and
.BR pop3front-maildir
by way of
.BR tcpserver ,
.B init.d/qmqpd
invokes
.BR qmail-qmqpd
(the QMQP server for qmail -- a specialized null-client protocol)
by way of
.BR tpcserver ,
.B init.d/qmtpd
invokes
.BR qmail-qmtpd
(the QMTP server for qmail -- a high-speed alternative to SMTP)
by way of
.BR tcpserver ,
and
.B init.d/smtpd
invokes
.BR qmail-smtpd
(the SMTP daemon for qmail)
by way of
.BR tcpserver ,
as well as optionally invoking
.BR rblsmtpd
if that package is installed.

These files typically reside in either
.IR /etc/rc.d/init.d
(most systems using SysV-style init scripts) or
.IR /etc/init.d
(Solaris).

.SH CONTROL FILES
.TP 5
.I aliasempty
Default delivery instructions.
Default:
.BR ./Mailbox .
The contents of this file are used as the default delivery instructions
for any legitimate local address that has either nonexistant or empty
delivery instructions.
See
.B dot-qmail(5)
for details on the contents.
To emulate the typical sendmail and
procmail combined configuration, install the dot-forward and procmail
packages (and ensure they and
.IR preline
are in the path), and put the following lines in this file:
.EX
   |dot-forward .forward
.br
   |preline procmail
.EE
.TP 5
.I antirbldomains
If
.IR antirbl
is installed, this file contains a list of domains for which to disable
RBL testing.
Default: empty.
.TP 5
.I concurrencypop3d
Maximum number of simultaneous inbound POP3 connections.
Default:
.BR 20 .
.TP 5
.I concurrencyqmqpd
Maximum number of simultaneous inbound QMQP connections.
Default:
.BR 20 .
.TP 5
.I concurrencyqmtpd
Maximum number of simultaneous inbound QMTP connections.
Default:
.BR 20 .
.TP 5
.I concurrencysmtpd
Maximum number of simultaneous inbound SMTP connections.
Default:
.BR 20 .
.TP 5
.I cvm
The credential validation module for all systems that require one
(currently only
.IR init.d/pop3d )
Default:
.BR cvm-unix .
.TP 5
.I logger
The program that is to be used for message logging.
Default:
.BR splogger .
It is started in the
.IR /var/log
directory.  If the string contains
.BR {} ,
then it replaced with the name of the system being logged (such as
.BR qmail
or
.BR pop3d ),
otherwise the system name is appended to the string.
To use
.IR multilog
ensure that a subdirectory in
.IR /var/log
exists for each of the systems
and put the following in this file:
.EX
   multilog -t {}
.EE
.TP 5
.I rbldomains
If
.IR rblsmtpd
is installed, this file lists the RBL domain servers on which to do lookups.
Default:
.BR rbl.maps.vix.com .
.TP 5
.I rbltimeout
If
.IR rblsmtpd
is installed, this file sets the timeout value.
Default:
.BR 60 .
.TP 5
.I ulimitcpu
The maximum amount of CPU time an individual daemon process (pop3d,
qmqpd, qmtpd, or smtpd) is allowed to consume before it is terminated,
in seconds.
Default:
.BR unlimited .
.TP 5
.I ulimitdata
The maximum data segment size of an individual daemon process, in
kilobytes.
Default:
.BR unlimited .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
logger(1),
splogger(1),
dot-qmail(5),
qmail-log(5),
antirbl(8),
qmail-config(8),
qmail-qmqpd(8),
qmail-qmtpd(8),
qmail-smtpd(8),
qmail-start(8),
rblsmtpd(8)
